Man on Pink Corner*
For Enrique Amorim
Imagine you bringing up Francisco Real that
way, out of the clear blue sky, him dead and
gone and all.
Because I met the man, even if this wa'n't
exactly his stomping ground—his was more up
in the north, up around Guadalupe Lake and
Batería. Truth is, I doubt if I crossed paths with
the man more than three times, and all three
were on a single night—though it's not one I'll
be likely ever to forget. It was the night La
Lujanera came home to sleep at my place—just
like that, just up and came—and the same night
Rosendo Juárez left Maldonado* never to
return. Of course you probably haven't had the
experience you'd need to recognize that
particular individual's name, but in his time
Rosendo Juárez—the Sticker, they called him—
was one of the toughest customers in Villa
Santa Rita. He was fierce with a knife, was
Rosendo Juárez, as you'd expect with a moniker
like that, and he was one of don Nicolás
Paredes' men—don Nicolás being one of Morel's
men.* He'd come into the cathouse just as
dandified as you can imagine, head to foot in
black, with his belt buckle and studs and all of
silver. Men and dogs, both, had a healthy
respect for him, and the whores did too;
everybody knew two killings'd been laid to him
already. He wore a tall sort of hat with a narrow
brim, which sat down like this on a long mane
of greasy hair. Rosendo was favored by fortune,
as they say, and we boys in the neighborhood
would imitate him right down to the way he
spit. But then there came a night that showed
us Rosendo Juarez's true colors.
It's hard to believe, but the story of that
night—a night as strange as any I've ever lived
through—began with an insolent red-wheeled
hack crammed with men, banging and rattling
along those streets of hard-packed clay, past
brick kilns and vacant lots. There was two men
in black, strumming guitars and lost in their
own thoughts, and the man on the driver's seat
using his whip on any loose dogs that took a
mind to mess with the piebald in the traces, and
one fellow wrapped tight in a poncho riding in
the middle
—which was the Yard master that everybody
always talked about, and he was spoiling for a
fight, spoiling for a kill. The night was so cool it
was like a blessing from heaven; two of these
fellows were riding up on the folded-back cloth
top of the hack—and it was as though the
loneliness made that rattletrap a veritable
parade. That was the first event of the many
that took place, but it wa'n't till a while
afterward that we found out this part. Me and
my friends, meantime, we'd been over at Julia's
place since early that evening, Julia's place
being a big old barracks-like building made out 
of sheets of zinc, between the Gauna road and
the Maldonado. It was a place you could pick
out from quite a distance off, on account of the
light from a brazen big red light—and on
account of the hullabaloo too. This Julia,
although she was a colored woman, was as
reliable and honest as you could ask for, so
there wa'n't ever any lack of musicians, good
drinks, and girls that could dance all night if
they was asked to. But this Lujanera I
mentioned, who was Rosendo's woman, she
outdid 'em all, and by a good long ways. La
Lujanera's dead now, señor, and I have to admit
that sometimes whole years go by that I don't
think about her, but you ought to have seen her
in her time, with those eyes of hers. Seeing' her
wouldn't put a man to sleep, and that's for sure.
Rotgut, milongas, women, a simpático kind
of curse at you from the mouth of Rosendo
Juárez, a slap on the back from him that you
tried to feel was friendly-like—the truth is, I was
as happy as a man could be. I was paired up
with a girl that could follow like she could read
my mind; the tango was having its way with us, 
whirling us this way and then that and losing us
and calling us back again and finding us.... To
make a long story short, we boys were dancing,
'most like bein' in a dream, when all of a sudden
the music seemed to get louder, and what it was
was that you could begin to hear the guitarstrumming of those two fellows I mentioned,
mixing in with the music there at Julia's, and
coming nearer every minute.
Then the gust of wind that had brought it to
us changed direction, and I went back to my
own body and my partner's, and the
conversations of the dance. A good while later,
there came a knock at the front door—a big
knock and a big voice, too. At that, everybody
got still; then a man's chest bumped the
swinging doors open and the man himself
stepped inside. The man resembled the voice a
good deal.
For us, he wa'n't Francisco Real yet, but you
couldn't deny he was a tall, muscular sort of
man, dressed head to foot in black, with a shawl
around his shoulders about the color of a bay
horse. I remember his face being Indian-like, 
unsociable.
One of the swinging doors hit me when it
banged open. Like the damn fool I am, I
reached out and swung at the fellow with my
left hand while with my right I went for the
knife I kept sharp and waiting in the armhole of
my vest, under my left arm. If we'd've tangled, I
wouldn't have lasted long. The man put out his
arm—and it was all he had to do—and brushed
me aside, like he was brushing away a fly. So
there I was—half sprawled there behind the
door, with my hand still under my vest, holding
on to my useless weapon, while he just kept
walking, like nothing had happened, right on
into the room. Just kept walking—taller than
any of the boys that were stepping aside to
make way for him, and acting like we were all
invisible. The first row of fellows—pure Eyetalians, an' all eyes—opened out like a fan, and
fast. But that wa'n't about to last. In the pack
just behind those first fellows, the Englishman
was waiting for him, and before that
Englishman could feel the stranger's hand on
his shoulder, he floored him with a roundhouse 
he had waitin'—and no sooner had he landed
his punch than the party started in for serious.
The place was yards and yards deep, but they
herded the stranger from one end of it to the
other, bumping him and shoving him and
whistling and spitting. At first they'd hit him
with their fists, but then when they saw that he
didn't so much as put up a hand to try to block
their punches, they started slapping him—
sometimes with their open hands and
sometimes just with the harmless fringe on
their shawls, like they were makin' fun of him.
And also like they were reserving him for
Rosendo, who hadn't budged from where he
was standing, back against the back wall, and
without saying a word. He was taking quick
puffs of his cigarette—I will say that—like he
already had an inkling of what the rest of us
would see clear enough later on. The
Yardmaster—straight and bloody, and the wind
from that jeering mob behind him—was getting
pushed and shoved back to Rosendo. Whistled
at, beaten, spit on, as soon as he came face to
face with Rosendo, he spoke. He looked at him 
and he wiped off his face with his arm, and he
said this:
"I'm Francisco Real, from up on the
Northside. Francisco Real, and they call me the
Yardmaster. I've let these poor sons of bitches
lift their hands to me because what I'm looking
for is a man. There are people out there—I
figure they're just talkers, you know—saying
there's some guy down here in these boondocks
that fancies himself a knife fighter, and a
bad'un—say he's called the Sticker. I'd like to
make his acquaintance, so he could show me—
me being nobody, you understand—what it
means to be a man of courage, a man you can
look up to."
He said that, and he never took his eyes off
him. Now a sticker for real glinted in his right
hand—no doubt he'd had it up his sleeve the
whole time. All around, the fellows that had
been pushing to get close started backing away,
and every one of us was looking at the two of
them, and you could have heard a pin drop.
Why, even the black gentleman that played the
violin, a blind man he was, he had his face
turned that way.
Just then I hear movement behind me, and I
see that in the doorway there's standing six or
seven men, which would be the Yardmaster's
gang, you see. The oldest of them, a weatherbeaten, country-looking man with a graystreaked mustache, steps forward and stands
there like he's dazzled by all the women and all
the light, and he very respectfully takes his hat
off. The others just stood there watching,
keeping their eyes open, ready to step in, you
see, if somebody wanted to start playing dirty.
Meantime, what was happening with
Rosendo—why hadn't he come out slashing at
that swaggering son of a bitch? He hadn't said a
word yet, hadn't so much as raised his eyes. His
cigarette, I don't know whether he spit it out or
whether it just fell out of his face. Finally he
managed to get a few words out, but so quiet
that those of us down at the other end of the
room couldn't hear what he was saying. Then
Francisco Real called him out again, and again
Rosendo refused to rise to the occasion. So at
that, the youngest of the strangers—just a kid he 
was—he whistled. La Lujanera looked at him
with hate in her eyes and she started through
that crowd with her braid down her back—
through that crowd of men and whores—and
she walked up to her man and she put her hand
to his chest and she pulled out his naked blade
and she handed it to him.
"Rosendo, I think you're needing this," she
said.
Right up next to the roof there was this long
kind of window that looked out over the creek.
Rosendo took the knife in his two hands and he
seemed to be trying to place it, like he didn't
recognize it. Then all of a sudden he reared back
and flung that knife straight through the
window, out into the Maldonado. I felt a cold
chill run down my spine.
"The only reason I don't carve you up for
beefsteak is that you make me sick," said the
stranger. At that, La Lujanera threw her arms
around this Yardmaster's neck, and she looked
at him with those eyes of hers, and she said,
with anger in her voice:
"Forget that dog—he had us thinking he was 
a man."
Francisco Real stood there perplexed for a
second, and then he put his arms around her
like it was going to be forever, and he yelled at
the musicians to play something—a tango, a
milonga—and then yelled at the rest of us to
dance. The milonga ran like a grass fire from
one end of the room to the other. Real danced
straight-faced, but without any daylight
between him and her, now that he could get
away with it.
They finally came to the door, and he yelled:
"Make ways, boys—she's gettin' sleepy!"
That's what he said, and they walked out
cheek to cheek, like in the drunken dizziness of
the tango, like they were drowning in that
tango.
I ought to be ashamed of myself. I spun
around the floor a couple of times with one of
the girls and then I just dropped her—on
account of the heat and the crowdedness, I told
her—and I slunk down along the wall till I got to
the door. It was a pretty night—but a pretty
night for who? Down at the corner stood that
hack, with those two guitars sitting up straight
on the seat, like two Christian gentlemen. It
galled me to see those guitars left out like that,
to realize that those boys thought so little of us
that they'd trust us not even to walk off with
their cheap guitars. It made me mad to feel like
we were a bunch of nobodies.
I grabbed the carnation behind my ear and
threw it in a mud puddle and then I stood there
looking at it, more or less so I wouldn't have to
think of anything else. I wished it was already
the next day, so I'd have this night behind me.
Just then, somebody elbowed me, and it felt
almost like a relief. It was Rosendo, slipping
through the neighborhood all by himself.
"Seems like you're always in the way,
asshole," he muttered as he passed by me—I
couldn't say whether to get it off his chest or
because he had his mind on something else. He
took the direction where it was darkest, down
along the Maldonado; I never saw the man
again.
I stood there looking at the things I'd been
seeing all my life—a sky that went on forever, 
the creek flowing angry-like down below there,
a sleeping horse, the dirt street, the kilns—and I
was struck by the thought that I was just
another weed growing along those banks,
coming up between the soap-worts and the
bone piles of the tanneries. What was supposed
to grow out of trash heaps if it wa'n't us? —We
was big talkers, but soft when it came to a fight,
all mouth and no backbone. Then I told myself
it wa'n't like that— the tougher the
neighborhood, the tougher a man necessarily
had to be. A trash heap? —
The milonga was having itself a ball, there
was plenty of racket in the houses, and the wind
brought the smell of honeysuckle. The night
was pretty, but so what? There were enough
stars that you got dizzy lookin' at 'em, one on
top of another up there. I struggled, I tell you,
to make myself feel like none of what had
happened meant anything to me, but Rosendo's
turning tail, that stranger's insufferable bullying
—it wouldn't let me alone. The tall son of a
bitch had even gotten himself a woman for the
night out of it. 
For that night and many more nights
besides, I thought to myself, and maybe for all
the rest of his nights, because La Lujanera was
serious medicine. Lord knows which way they'd
gone. But they couldn't be far. Probably at it
hammer and tongs right now, in the first ditch
they'd come to.
When I finally got back inside, that perfectly
pleasant little dance was still going on, like
nothing had ever happened.
Making myself as inconspicuous as I could, I
peered around through the crowd, and I saw
that one and another of our boys had slipped
out, but the guys from the Northside were
tangoing along with everybody else. There was
no elbowing or words or anything; everything
was real polite, but everybody was keeping their
eyes open. The music was kind of sleepy, and
the girls that were dancing with the Northside
boys were as meek as mice.
I was expecting something, but not what
turned out to happen.
Outside we heard a woman crying, and then
a voice that was familiar in a way, but calm,
almost too calm, as though it didn't belong to a
real person, saying to her:
"Go ahead, darlin', go on in," and then some
more of the woman's crying. Then the voice
seemed to be getting a little desperate.
"Open the door, I said! Open the door, you
motherless bitch, open the door!"
At that, the rickety doors swung open and La
Lujanera stepped in, alone. She came in kind of
looking over her shoulder, like somebody was
herding her inside.
"She's got a spirit back there commanding
her," said the Englishman.
"A dead man, my friend," said the
Yardmaster then. His face was like a
drunkard's. He came in, and he took a few
unsteady steps into the clearing that we all
made for him, like we had before. He stood
there tall, and unseeing, and then he toppled
like a post. One of the boys that had come with
him turned him over on his back and put his
poncho under his head for a pillow. The boy's
hands came away bloody.
That was when we saw that he had a big knife 
wound in his chest; his blood was pooling up
and turnin' black this bright red neckerchief he
was wearing, but that I hadn't noticed before
because his shawl had covered it. To try to stop
the blood, one of the girls brought over some
rotgut and scorched rags. He was in no
condition to tell us what'd happened, and La
Lujanera was looking at him sort of vacant-like,
with her arms just hanging down at her sides.
Everybody was asking her what happened with
their eyes, and finally she managed to find her
voice. She said that after she'd gone outside
with the Yardmaster there, they went off to a
little vacant lot, and just then a stranger
appeared and desperately called out the
Yardmaster to fight, and he stabbed him, gave
him that wound there, and she swore she didn't
know who the man was, but it wa'n't Rosendo.
Who was going to believe that?
The man at our feet was dying. My thought
was, whoever had fixed his clock, his hand had
been pretty steady. But the Yardmaster was
tough, you had to give him that. When he came
to the door just now, Julia had been brewing up 
some mate, and the mate went around the
room and came all the way back to me before he
was finally dead. "Cover my face," he said, when
he knew he couldn't last anymore. His pride
was all he had left, and he wa'n't going to let
people gawk at the expressions on his face while
he lay there dyin'. Somebody put that highcrowned black hat over his face, and he died
under it, without a sound. When his chest
stopped rising and falling, somebody got up the
nerve to uncover him—he had that tired look
that dead men get. He was one of the toughest
men there was back then, from Bateríato the
Southside—but no sooner was he dead and his
mouth shut for all time, I lost all my hate for
him.
"All it takes to die is to be alive," one of the
girls back in the crowd said, and then another
one said something else, in a pensive sort of
way:
"Man thought so highly of himself, and all
he's good for now is to draw flies."
At that, the Northsiders all muttered
something to each other, real low, and then two 
of 'em at the same time said it out loud:
"The woman killed'im."
One of 'em yelled in her face, asking her if it
was her that did it, and they all surrounded her.
At that I forgot all about being meek and not
getting in anybody's way, and I pushed through
to her like a shot.
I'm such a damn fool, it's a wonder as mad as
I was I didn't pull out the little dagger I always
carried on me. I could feel almost everybody—
not to say everybody—looking at me.
"Look at this woman's hands," I said with a
sneer. "Do they look steady enough—does she
look like she'd have heart enough—to put a
Yardmaster like that?"
Then I added, cool but tough at the same
time:
"Who'd've thought the dear departed, who
they say was a man to be reckoned with on his
own turf, would've ended up this way, and in a
back-water as dead as this is, where nothin' ever
happens unless some strangers wander in to
give us somethin' to talk about and stay around
to get spit on afterward?" 
Nobody rose to that bait, either.
Just then through the silence came the sound
of riders. It was the police. For one reason or
another, everybody there had reason to keep
the law out of this, so they decided that the best
thing was to move the body down to the creek.
You'll recall that long window that the gleam of
the knife sailed through?
Well, that's the very same way the man in
black went. A bunch of them lifted him up and
after they'd separated him from all the money
and whatnot he had on him, somebody hacked
off his finger to get to the ring he wore.
Vultures, señor, to pick over a poor defenseless
dead man like that, after another, better man
has fixed'im. Then a heave-ho, and that
rushing, long-suffering water carried him away.
I couldn't say whether they gutted him*—I
didn't want to look. The gray-mustached
individual never took his eyes off me. La
Lujanera took advantage of all the shufflingabout to disappear.
By the time the law came in to have their
look around, the dance had a pretty good head
of steam up again. The blind man on the violin
knew how to play habaneras the likes of which
you won't hear anymore. Outside, the day began
to want to dawn a little. There was a line of
arborvitae posts along the top of a hill, standing
there all alone-like, because you couldn't see the
thin strands of wire between 'em that early in
the morning.
I strolled nice and easy on home to my place,
which was about three blocks away. There was a
light burning in the window, but then it went
out. When I saw that, I can tell you I moved a
good bit faster.
And then, Borges, for the second time I
pulled out that short, sharp-edged knife I
always carried here, under my vest, under my
left arm, and I gave it another long slow
inspection—and it was just like new, all
innocent, and there was not the slightest trace
of blood on it. 
