The Other
The incident occurred in February, 1969, in
Cambridge, north of Boston. I didn't write
about it then because my foremost objective at
the time was to put it out of my mind, so as not
to go insane. Now, in 1972, it strikes me that if I
do write about what happened, people will read
it as a story and in time I, too, may be able to
see it as one.
I know that it was almost horrific while it
lasted—and it grew worse yet through the
sleepless nights that followed. That does not
mean that anyone else will be stirred by my
telling of it.
It was about ten o'clock in the morning. I was
sitting comfortably on a bench beside the
Charles River.
Some five hundred yards to my right there
was a tall building whose name I never learned.
Large chunks of ice were floating down the gray 
current. Inevitably, the river made me think of
time ... Heraclitus' ancient image. I had slept
well; the class I'd given the previous evening
had, I think, managed to interest my students.
There was not a soul in sight.
Suddenly, I had the sense (which
psychologists tell us is associated with states of
fatigue) that I had lived this moment before.
Someone had sat down on the other end of my
bench. I'd have preferred to be alone, but I
didn't want to get up immediately for fear of
seeming rude. The other man had started
whistling. At that moment there occurred the
first of the many shocks that morning was to
bring me.
What the man was whistling—or trying to
whistle (I have never been able to carry a
tune)—was the popular Argentine milonga La
tapera, by Elias Regules. The tune carried me
back to a patio that no longer exists and to the
memory of Alvaro Melián Lafinur, who died so
many years ago. Then there came the words.
They were the words of the décima that begins
the song. The voice was not Alvaro's but it tried 
to imitate Alvaro's. I recognized it with horror.
I turned to the man and spoke.
"Are you Uruguayan or Argentine?"
"Argentine, but I've been living in Geneva
since '14," came the reply.
There was a long silence. Then I asked a
second question.
"At number seventeen Malagnou, across the
street from the Russian Orthodox Church?"
He nodded.
"In that case" I resolutely said to him, "your
name is Jorge Luis Borges. I too am Jorge Luis
Borges. We are in 1969, in the city of
Cambridge."
"No," he answered in my own, slightly
distant, voice, "I am here in Geneva, on a bench,
a few steps from the Rhône."
Then, after a moment, he went on:
"It is odd that we look so much alike, but you
are much older than I, and you have gray hair."
"I can prove to you that I speak the truth," I
answered. "I'll tell you things that a stranger
couldn't know.
In our house there's a silver mate cup with a 
base of serpents that our great-grandfather
brought from Peru. There's also a silver
washbasin that was hung from the saddle. In
the wardrobe closet in your room, there are two
rows of books: the three volumes of Lane's
translation of the Thousand and One Nights —
which Lane called The Arabian Nights
Entertainment —with steel engravings and
notes in fine print between the chapters,
Quicherat's Latin dictionary, Tacitus' Germania
in Latin and in Gordon's English version, a
Quixote in the Gamier edition, a copy of Rivera
Indarte's Tablas de sangre signed by the
author, Carlyle's Sartor Resartus, a biography
of Amiel, and, hidden behind the others, a
paperbound volume detailing the sexual
customs of the Balkans. Nor have I forgotten a
certain afternoon in a second-floor apartment
on the Plaza Dubourg."
"Dufour" he corrected me.
"All right, Dufour," I said. "Is that enough for
you?"
"No," he replied. "Those 'proofs' of yours
prove nothing. If I'm dreaming you, it's only
natural that you would know what I know. That
long-winded catalog of yours is perfectly
unavailing."
His objection was a fair one.
"If this morning and this encounter are
dreams," I replied, "then each of us does have to
think that he alone is the dreamer. Perhaps our
dream will end, perhaps it won't. Meanwhile,
our clear obligation is to accept the dream, as
we have accepted the universe and our having
been brought into it and the fact that we see
with our eyes and that we breathe."
"But what if the dream should last?" he asked
anxiously.
In order to calm him—and calm myself, as
well—I feigned a self-assurance I was far from
truly feeling.
"My dream," I told him, "has already lasted
for seventy years. And besides—when one
wakes up, the person one meets is always
oneself. That is what's happening to us now,
except that we are two.
Wouldn't you like to know something about
my past, which is now the future that awaits
you?"
He nodded wordlessly. I went on, a bit
hesitatingly:
"Mother is well, living happily in her house
in Buenos Aires, on the corner of Charcas and
Maipú, but Father died some thirty years ago. It
was his heart. He had had a stroke—that was
what finally killed him. When he laid his left
hand over his right, it was like a child's hand
resting atop a giant's. He died impatient for
death, but without a word of complaint. Our
grandmother had died in the same house.
Several days before the end, she called us all
in and told us, 'I am an old, old woman, dying
very slowly.
I won't have anyone making a fuss over such
a common, ordinary thing as that.' Norah, your
sister, is married and has two children. By the
way—at home, how is everyone?"
"Fine. Father still always making his jokes
against religion. Last night he said Jesus was
like the gauchos, who'll never commit
themselves, which is why He spoke in parables."
He thought for a moment, and then asked:
"What about you?"
"I'm not sure exactly how many books you'll
write, but I know there are too many. You'll
write poetry that will give you a pleasure that
others will not fully share, and stories of a
fantastic turn. You will be a teacher—like your
father, and like so many others of our blood."
I was glad he didn't ask me about the success
or failure of the books. I then changed my tack.
"As for history ... There was another war,
with virtually the same antagonists. France
soon capitulated; England and America battled
a German dictator named Hitler—the cyclical
Battle of Waterloo. Buenos Aires engendered
another Rosas in 1946, much like our kinsman
in the first one.* In '55, the province of Córdoba
saved us, as Entre Ríos had before. Things are
bad now. Russia is taking over the planet;
America, hobbled by the superstition of
democracy, can't make up its mind to be an
empire. Our own country is more provincial
with every passing day—more provincial and
more self-important, as though it had shut its
eyes. I shouldn't be surprised if the teaching of 
Latin were replaced by the teaching of
Guaraní."
I realized that he was barely listening. The
elemental fear of the impossible yet true had
come over him, and he was daunted. I, who
have never been a father, felt a wave of love for
that poor young man who was dearer to me
than a child of my own flesh and blood. I saw
that his hands were clutching a book. I asked
what he was reading.
"The Possessed—or, as I think would be
better, The Devils, by Fyodor Dostoievsky," he
answered without vanity.
"It's a bit hazy to me now. Is it any good?"
The words were hardly out of my mouth
when I sensed that the question was
blasphemous.
"The great Russian writer," he affirmed
sententiously, "has penetrated more deeply
than any other man into the labyrinths of the
Slavic soul."
I took that rhetorical pronouncement as
evidence that he had grown calmer.
I asked him what other works by Dostoievsky 
he had read.
He ticked off two or three, among them The
Double.
I asked him whether he could tell the
difference between the characters when he
read, as one could with Joseph Conrad, and
whether he planned to read on through
Dostoievsky's entire corpus.
"The truth is, I don't," he answered with a
slight note of surprise.
I asked him what he himself was writing, and
he told me he was working on a book of poetry
to be called Red Anthems.
He'd also thought about calling it Red
Rhythms or Red Songs.
"Why not?" I said. "You can cite good
authority for it—Rubén Darío's blue poetry and
Verlaine's gray song."
Ignoring this, he clarified what he'd meant—
his book would be a hymn to the brotherhood of
all mankind. The modern poet cannot turn his
back on his age.
I thought about this for a while, and then
asked if he really felt that he was brother to
every living person—every undertaker, for
example? every letter carrier? every undersea
diver, everybody that lives on the evennumbered side of the street, all the people with
laryngitis? (The list could go on.) He said his
book would address the great oppressed and
outcast masses.
"Your oppressed and outcast masses," I
replied, "are nothing but an abstraction. Only
individuals exist—if, in fact, anyone does.
Yesterday's man is not today's, as some Greek
said. We two, here on this bench in Geneva or
in Cambridge, are perhaps the proof of that."
Except in the austere pages of history,
memorable events go unaccompanied by
memorable phrases. A man about to die tries to
recall a print that he glimpsed in his childhood;
soldiers about to go into battle talk about the
mud or their sergeant. Our situation was unique
and, frankly, we were unprepared. We talked,
inevitably, about literature; I fear I said no
more than I customarily say to journalists. My
alter ego believed in the imagination, in
creation—in the discovery of new metaphors; I 
myself believed in those that correspond to
close and widely acknowledged likenesses,
those our imagination has already accepted: old
age and death, dreams and life, the flow of time
and water. I informed the young man of this
opinion, which he himself was to express in a
book, years later.
But he was barely listening. Then suddenly
he spoke.
"If you have been me, how can you explain
the fact that you've forgotten that you once
encountered an elderly gentleman who in 1918
told you that he, too was Borges?"
I hadn't thought of that difficulty. I answered
with conviction.
"Perhaps the incident was so odd that I made
an effort to forget it."
He ventured a timid question.
"How's your memory?"
I realized that for a mere boy not yet twenty,
a man of seventy some-odd years was
practically a corpse.
"It's often much like forgetfulness," I
answered, "but it can still find what it's sent to 
find. I'm studying Anglo-Saxon, and I'm not at
the foot of the class."
By this time our conversation had lasted too
long to be conversation in a dream.
I was struck by a sudden idea.
"I can prove to you this minute," I said, "that
you aren't dreaming me. Listen to this line of
poetry. So far as I can recall, you've never heard
it before."
I slowly intoned the famous line: "L'hydreunivers tordant son corpse caillé d'astres."
I could sense his almost fear-stricken
bafflement. He repeated the line softly, savoring
each glowing word.
"It's true," he stammered, "I could never
write a line like that."
Hugo had brought us together.
I now recall that shortly before this, he had
fervently recited that short poem in which
Whitman recalls a night shared beside the sea—
a night when Whitman had been truly happy.
"If Whitman sang of that night," I observed,
"it's because he desired it but it never
happened. The poem gains in greatness if we
sense that it is the expression of a desire, a
longing, rather than the narration of an event."
He stared at me.
"You don't know him," he exclaimed.
"Whitman is incapable of falsehood."*
A half century does not pass without leaving
its mark. Beneath our conversation, the
conversation of two men of miscellaneous
readings and diverse tastes, I realized that we
would not find common ground. We were too
different, yet too alike. We could not deceive
one another, and that makes conversation hard.
Each of us was almost a caricature of the
other. The situation was too unnatural to last
much longer.
There was no point in giving advice, no point
in arguing, because the young man's inevitable
fate was to be the man that I am now.
Suddenly I recalled a fantasy by Coleridge. A
man dreams that he is in paradise, and he is
given a flower as proof. When he wakes up,
there is the flower.
I hit upon an analogous stratagem.
"Listen," I said, "do you have any money?" 
"Yes," he replied. "About twenty francs. I
invited Simón Jichlinskito have dinner with me
at the Crocodile tonight."
"Tell Simón that he'll practice medicine in
Carouge, and that he will do a great deal of
good... now, give me one of your coins."
He took three silver pieces and several
smaller coins out of his pocket. He held out one
of the silver pieces to me; he didn't understand.
I handed him one of those ill-advised
American bills that are all of the same size
though of very different denominations. He
examined it avidly.
"Impossible!" he cried. "It's dated 1964."
(Months later someone told me that
banknotes are not dated.)
"This, all this, is a miracle," he managed to
say. "And the miraculous inspires fear. Those
who witnessed the resurrection of Lazarus must
have been terrified."
We haven't changed a bit, I thought. Always
referring back to books.
He tore the bill to shreds and put the coin
back in his pocket. 
I had wanted to throw the coin he gave me in
the river. The arc of the silver coin disappearing
into the silver river would have lent my story a
vivid image, but fate would not have it.
I replied that the supernatural, if it happens
twice, is no longer terrifying; I suggested that
we meet again the next day, on that same bench
that existed in two times and two places.
He immediately agreed, then said, without
looking at his watch, that it was getting late, he
had to be going. Both of us were lying, and each
of us knew that the other one was lying. I told
him that someone was coming to fetch me.
"Fetch you?" he queried.
"Yes. When you reach my age, you'll have
almost totally lost your eyesight. You'll be able
to see the color yellow, and light and shadow.
But don't worry. Gradual blindness is not tragic.
It's like the slowly growing darkness of a
summer evening."
We parted without having touched one
another. The next day, I did not go to the bench.
The other man probably didn't, either.
I have thought a great deal about this
encounter, which I've never told anyone about.
I believe I have discovered the key to it. The
encounter was real, but the other man spoke to
me in a dream, which was why he could forget
me; I spoke to him while I was awake, and so I
am still tormented by the memory.
The other man dreamed me, but did not
dream me rigorously —he dreamed, I now
realize, the impossible date on that dollar bill.
