The End
Lying on his back, Recabarren opened his
eyes a bit and saw the sloping ceiling of thick
cane. From the other room there came the
strumming of a guitar, like some
inconsequential labyrinth, infinitely tangling
and untangling.... Little by little, reality came
back to him, the ordinary things that now would
always be just these ordinary things. He looked 
down without pity at his great useless body, the
plain wool poncho that wrapped his legs.
Outside, beyond the thick bars at his window,
spread the flatland and the evening; he had
slept, but the sky was still filled with light. He
groped with his left arm until he found the
brass cowbell that hung at the foot of the cot.
He shook it once or twice; outside his door, the
unassuming chords continued.
The guitar was being played by a black man
who had shown up one night flattering himself
that he was a singer; he had challenged another
stranger to a song contest, the way traveling
singers did. Beaten, he went on showing up at
the general-store-and-bar night after night, as
though he were waiting for someone. He spent
hours with the guitar, but he never sang again;
it could be that the defeat had turned him
bitter. People had grown used to the inoffensive
man. Recabarren, the owner of the bar, would
never forget that contest; the next day, as he
was trying to straighten some bales of yerba,
his right side had suddenly gone dead on him,
and he discovered that he couldn't talk. From
learning to pity the misfortunes of the heroes of
our novels, we wind up feeling too much pity for
our own; but not Recabarren, who accepted his
paralysis as he had earlier accepted the severity
and the solitudes of the Americas. A man in the
habit of living in the present, as animals do, he
now looked up at the sky and reflected that the
red ring around the moon was a sign of rain.
A boy with Indian-like features (Recabarren's
son, perhaps) opened the door a crack.
Recabarren asked him with his eyes whether
anybody was around; the boy, not one to talk
much, made a motion with his hand to say there
wasn't—the black man didn't count. Then the
prostrate man was left alone; his left hand
played awhile with the bell, as though
exercising some power.
The plains, in the last rays of the sun, were
almost abstract, as though seen in a dream. A
dot wavered on the horizon, then grew until it
became a horseman riding, or so it seemed,
toward the house.
Recabarren could make out the broadbrimmed hat, the dark poncho, the piebald
horse, but not the face of the rider, who finally
reined in the horse and came toward the house
at an easy trot. Some two hundred yards out, he
veered off to the side. At that, the man was out
of Recabarren's line of sight, but Recabarren
heard him speak, get down off his horse, tie it to
the post, and with a firm step enter the bar.
Without raising his eyes from the guitar,
where he seemed to be looking for something,
the black man spoke. "I knew I could count on
you, sir," he softly said.
"And I knew I could count on you, old
nigger," the other man replied, his voice harsh.
"A heap of days I've made you wait, but here I
am."
There was a silence. Then the black man
spoke again. "I'm getting used to waiting. I've
been waiting now for seven years."
Unhurried, the other man explained:
"It'd been longer than seven years that I'd
gone without seeing my children. I found them
that day, and I wouldn't have it so's I looked to
them like a man on his way to a knife fight."*
"I understood that," the black man said. "I
hope they were all in good health."
The stranger, who had sat down at the bar,
gave a hearty laugh at that. He ordered a drink
and took a sip or two, but didn't finish it.
"I gave them some advice," he said, "which is
something you can never get too much of and
doesn't cost a lot. I told them, among other
things, that a man ought not to go spilling
another man's blood."
A slow chord preceded the black man's
response: "Good advice, too. That way they
won't grow up to be like us."
"Not like me, anyway," said the stranger, who
then added, as though thinking out loud: "Fate
would have it that I kill, and now it's put a knife
in my hand again."
"Fall's coming on," the black man observed,
as though he hadn't heard, "and the days are
getting shorter."
"The light that's left will be enough for me,"
replied the other man, getting to his feet.
He stood square before the black man and in
a tired voice said to him, "Leave that guitar
alone, now—you've got another kind of contest 
to try to win today."
The two men walked toward the door. As the
black man stepped outside, he murmured,
"Could be this one goes as bad f'r me as the
other one did."
"It's not that the first one went bad for you,"
the other man answered, serious. "It's that you
couldn't hardly wait to get to the second one."
They walked beside each other until they got
some distance from the houses. One place on
the plains was much like another, and the moon
was bright. Suddenly they looked at each other,
stopped, and the stranger took off his spurs.
They already had their ponchos wrapped
around their forearms when the black man
spoke.
"One thing I want to ask you before we get
down to it. I want you to put all your courage
and all your skill into this, like you did seven
years ago when you killed my brother."
For perhaps the first time in their exchange,
Martín Fierro heard the hatred. His blood felt
it, like a sharp prod. They circled, clashed, and
sharp steel marked the black man's face. 
There is an hour just at evening when the
plains seem on the verge of saying something;
they never do, or perhaps they do—eternally—
though we don't understand it, or perhaps we
do understand but what they say is as
untranslatable as music.... From his cot,
Recabarren saw the end. A thrust, and the black
man dodged back, lost his footing, feigned a
slash to his opponent's face, and then lunged
out with a deep jab that buried the knife in his
belly. Then came another thrust, which the
storekeeper couldn't see, and Fierro did not get
up. Unmoving, the black man seemed to stand
watch over the agonizing death. He wiped off
the bloody knife in the grass and walked slowly
back toward the houses, never looking back.
His work of vengeance done, he was nobody
now. Or rather, he was the other one: there was
neither destination nor destiny on earth for
him, and he had killed a man. 
