The Shape of the Sword
His face was traversed by a vengeful scar, an
ashen and almost perfect arc that sliced from
the temple on one side of his head to his cheek
on the other. His true name does not matter;
everyone in Tacuarembó called him "the
Englishman at La Colorada." The owner of the
land, Cardoso, hadn't wanted to sell it; I heard
that the Englishman plied him with an
argument no one could have foreseen—he told
him the secret history of the scar. He had come
from the border, from Rio Grande do Sul; there
were those who said that over in Brazil he had
been a smuggler. The fields had gone to grass,
the water was bitter; to put things to right, the
Englishman worked shoulder to shoulder with
his peons. People say he was harsh to the point
of cruelty, but scrupulously fair. They also say
he liked his drink; once or twice a year he would
shut himself up in the room in the belvedere,
and two or three days later he would emerge as
though from a battle or a spell of dizziness—
pale, shaking, befuddled, and as authoritarian
as ever. I recall his glacial eyes, his lean energy,
his gray mustache. He was standoffish; the fact
is, his Spanish was rudimentary, and tainted
with the accents of Brazil. Aside from the
occasional business letter or pamphlet, he got
no mail.
The last time I made a trip through the
northern provinces, high water along the
Caraguatá forced me to spend the night at La
Colorada. Within a few minutes I thought I
sensed that my showing up that way was
somehow inopportune. I tried to ingratiate
myself with the Englishman, and to do so I
seized upon patriotism, that least discerning of
passions. I remarked that a country with
England's spirit was invincible. My interlocutor
nodded, but added with a smile that he wasn't
English—he was Irish, from Dungarvan. That
said, he stopped, as though he had let slip a
secret.
We went outside after dinner to have a look
at the sky. The clouds had cleared away, but far
off behind the sharp peaks, the southern sky,
creviced and split with lightning, threatened
another storm. Back in the dilapidated dining
room, the peon who'd served dinner brought
out a bottle of rum. We drank for a long time, in
silence.
I am not sure what time it was when I
realized that I was drunk; I don't know what
inspiration or elation or boredom led me to
remark on my host's scar. His face froze; for
several seconds I thought he was going to eject
me from the house. But at last, his voice
perfectly ordinary, he said to me:
"I will tell you the story of my scar under one
condition—that no contempt or condemnation
be withheld, no mitigation for any iniquity be
pleaded."
I agreed. This is the story he told, his English
interspersed with Spanish, and even with
Portuguese: In 1922, in one of the cities of
Connaught, I was one of the many young men
who were conspiring to win Ireland's
independence. Of my companions there, some
are still living, working for peace; others,
paradoxically, are fighting under English
colours, at sea or in the desert; one, the best of 
us all, was shot at dawn in the courtyard of a
prison, executed by men filled with dreams;
others (and not the least fortunate, either) met
their fate in the anonymous, virtually secret
battles of the civil war. We were Republicans
and Catholics; we were, I suspect, romantics.
For us, Ireland was not just the Utopian future
and the unbearable present; it was a bitter yet
loving mythology, it was the circular towers and
red bogs, it was the repudiation of Parnell, and
it was the grand epics that sing the theft of bulls
that were heroes in an earlier incarnation, and
in other incarnations fish, and mountains. ...
One evening I shall never forget, there came to
us a man, one of our own, from Munster—a
man called John Vincent Moon.
He couldn't have been more than twenty. He
was thin yet slack-muscled, all at once—he gave
the uncomfortable impression of being an
invertebrate. He had studied, ardently and with
some vanity, virtually every page of one of those
Communist manuals; he would haul out his
dialectical materialism to cut off any argument.
There are infinite reasons a man may have for 
hating or loving another man; Moon reduced
the history of the world to one sordid economic
conflict. He declared that the Revolution was
foreordained to triumph. I replied that only lost
causes were of any interest to a gentleman....
Night had fallen; we pursued our crosspurposes in the hallway, down the stairs, then
through the vague streets.
The verdicts Moon handed down impressed
me considerably less than the sense of
unappealable and absolute truth with which he
issued them. The new comrade did not argue,
he did not debate—he pronounced judgement,
contemptuously and, to a degree, wrathfully.
As we came to the last houses of the city that
night, we were stupefied by the sudden sound of
gunfire.
(Before this, or afterward, we skirted the
blind wall of a factory or a gaol.) We turned
down a dirt street; a soldier, huge in the glare,
burst out of a torched cottage. He shouted at us
to halt. I started walking faster; my comrade did
not follow me. I turned around— John Vincent
Moon was standing as motionless as a rabbit
caught in one's headlights—eternalized,
somehow, by terror. I ran back, floored the
soldier with a single blow, shook Vincent Moon,
cursed him, and ordered him to come with me.
I had to take him by the arm; the passion of fear
had stripped him of all will. But then we did
run—we fled through the conflagration-riddled
night. A burst of rifle fire came our way, and a
bullet grazed Moon's right shoulder; as we fled
through the pine trees, a weak sob racked his
breast.
In that autumn of 1922 I had gone more or
less underground, and was living in General
Berkeley's country house. The general (whom I
had never seen) was at that time posted to some
administrative position or other out in Bengal;
the house was less than a hundred years old but
it was gloomy and dilapidated and filled with
perplexing corridors and pointless
antechambers. The museum-cabinet and huge
library arrogated to themselves the entire lower
floor—there were the controversial and
incompatible books that are somehow the
history of the nineteenth century; there were
scimitars from Nishapur, in whose frozen
crescents the wind and violence of battle
seemed to be living on. We entered the house (I
think I recall) through the rear. Moon, shaking,
his mouth dry, mumbled that the events of the
night had been "interesting"; I salved and
bandaged him, then brought him a cup of tea.
The wound was superficial. Suddenly, puzzled,
he stammered:
"You took a terrible chance, coming back to
save me like that."
I told him it was nothing. (It was the habit of
civil war that impelled me to act as I acted;
besides, the imprisonment of a single one of us
could imperil the entire cause.)
The next day, Moon had recovered his
composure. He accepted a cigarette and
subjected me to a harsh interrogation as to the
"financial resources of our revolutionary party."
His questions were quite lucid; I told him
(truthfully) that the situation was grave. Deep
rumblings of gunfire troubled the peace of the
south. I told Moon that our comrades were
waiting for us. My overcoat and revolver were 
up in my room; when I returned, I found Moon
lying on the sofa, his eyes closed. He thought he
had a fever; he pleaded a painful spasm in his
shoulder.
It was then that I realized he was a hopeless
coward. I clumsily told him to take care of
himself, then left.
I was embarrassed by the man and his fear,
shamed by him, as though I myself were the
coward, not Vincent Moon. Whatsoever one
man does, it is as though all men did it. That is
why it is not unfair that a single act of
disobedience in a garden should contaminate
all humanity; that is why it is not unfair that a
single Jew's crucifixion should be enough to
save it. Schopenhauer may have been right—I
am other men, any man is all men, Shakespeare
is somehow the wretched John Vincent Moon.
We spent nine days in the general's great
house. Of the agonies and the rays of light of
that dark war I shall say nothing; my purpose is
to tell the story of this scar that affronts me. In
my memory, those nine days form a single
day—except for the next to last, when our men 
stormed a barracks and avenged, life for life,
our sixteen comrades fallen to the machine
guns at Elphin. I would slip out of the house
about dawn, in the blurred confusion of first
light. I would be back toward nightfall. My
comrade would be waiting for me upstairs; his
wound would not allow him to come down.
When I look back, I see him with some book of
strategy in his hand—F. N. Maude, or
Clausewitz. "The weapon of preference for me,"
he confessed to me one night, "is artillery." He
enquired into our plans; he enjoyed criticizing
or re-thinking them. He was also much given to
deploring "our woeful financial base";
dogmatically and sombrely he would prophesy
the disastrous end. "C'est une affaire flambée,"
he would mutter. To shcw that his physical
cowardice was a matter of indifference to him,
he made a great display of mental arrogance.
Thus passed, well or not so well, nine days.
On the tenth, the city fell once and forever
into the hands of the Black and Tans. Highsitting, silent horsemen patrolled their beats;
there was ash and smoke in the wind. I saw a
dead body sprawled on one corner—yet that
dead body is less vivid in my memory than the
dummy that the soldiers endlessly practised
their marksmanship on in the middle of the city
square.... I had gone out when dawn was just
streaking the sky; before noon, I was back.
Moon was in the library, talking to someone; I
realized from the tone of his voice that he was
speaking on the telephone. Then I heard my
name; then, that I'd be back at seven, and then,
that I'd be arrested as I came across the lawn.
My rational friend was rationally selling me out.
I heard him demand certain guarantees of his
own safety.
Here my story becomes confused and peters
out a bit. I know that I chased the snitch
through black corridors of nightmare and steep
stairwells of vertigo. Moon knew the house well,
every bit as well as I.
Once or twice I lost him, but I managed to
corner him before the soldiers arrested me.
From one of the general's suits of armor, I
seized a scimitar, and with that steel crescent
left a flourish on his face forever—a half-moon 
of blood. To you alone, Borges—you who are a
stranger—I have made this confession.
Your contempt is perhaps not so painful.”
Here the narrator halted. I saw that his
hands were trembling.
"And Moon?" I asked. "What became of
Moon?"
"He was paid his Judas silver and he ran off
to Brazil. That evening, in the city square, I saw
a dummy shot by a firing squad of drunks."
I waited vainly for the rest of the story.
Finally, I asked him to go on.
A groan made his entire body shiver; he
gestured, feebly, gently, toward the curving
whitish scar.
"Do you not believe me?" he stammered. "Do
you not see set upon my face the mark of my
iniquity? I have told you the story this way so
that you would hear it out. It was I who
betrayed the man who saved me and gave me
shelter—it is I who am Vincent Moon. Now,
despise me."
1942
